\section{Conclusion} \locallabel{sec:conclusion}
This study describes our continued use of Hairball for assessment of
Scratch-based assignments. We described our modifications to Scratch in order
to apply instructional scaffolding and presented the results of two iterations
of our sequential execution assignment. Two goals of our assignment were that
students would recognize the need to add additional blocks to the base-project
and understand the importance of block ordering in order to demonstrate
proficiency of sequential execution in Scratch. In this section we state our
conclusions regarding improvements made to our curriculum, and to the use of
static analysis as a curriculum development tool.

\subsection{Curriculum Improvements}
We created and utilized Hairball plugins to help answer the three questions we
sought out to answer (Section~\localref{sec:results}). In total, 102 of the 149
students for whom we had consent completed the assignment. While an overall
68\% is not impressive, the percentage increased from 52\% to 73\% due to
improvements we made after \sone{}. While there is room for improvement with
respect to the success of the students, we consider this increase to be a
success of the improvements we made to both our Scratch interface and the
curriculum.

The single most important change we made was the addition of the \glideto{}
block as it enabled the use of only a single block for each of the three
essential \emph{pick up} actions. Recall that our goal was not for students to
understand position and orientation changes, but simply for them to program
sequential code that \emph{picks up} all the objects. Based on these results we
believe additional instructional scaffolding would be beneficial. Students
should first be asked to solve the challenge using only \glideto{}, and once
mastering that task, should be challenged with a similar task using only one of
the \emph{Orient and Glide} approaches. In both cases, only the necessary
blocks will be available for students to use.

\subsection{Static Analysis}
Hairball plugins were written to quantify students challenged with issues
identified by researchers in the field notes. We described one such plugin
identifying that 40\% of all students experienced a Scratch race
condition. Interestingly, 78\% of those students completed the assignment
indicating a statistically significant correlation between experiencing the
race condition and completing the assignment. While we were successful in
writing automated assessment for the race condition issue, we could not do the
same for the \dce{} issue. The plugin was able to filter half the snapshots,
however, the root issue was that even with manual analysis we could not
precisely differentiate between snapshots exhibiting this behavior and normal
behavior with the information contained in the snapshots. In this regard, we
consider the use of the plugin a success as it helped us swiftly determine the
large subset of submissions that may exhibit the behavior, which, in turn,
permitted us to come to the aforementioned conclusion.

The two most significant benefits of using static analysis in assignment
assessment the speed of assessment and the accuracy of assessment. While there
is overhead involved in creating static analysis, it is a one-time overhead
with essentially infinite scaling capabilities, whereas the overhead for
training a person may require less time but has no scaling
capabilities. Furthermore, static analysis will always produce the same result
providing significantly improved confidence in the results.

The most significant advantage of incorporating static analysis in
assessment is to dramatically reduce overhead in the event the assessment
criteria requires alteration. After each change we could (and did) rerun the
entire assessment across all snapshots in the matter of minutes. A human, on
the other hand, could at best assess six snapshots in a minute, which, if
feasible, would require 2.6 hours for our 935 snapshots. While the number of
iterations could be reduced with more precise assessment instructions, using
static analysis permits significantly more flexibility per cost.

Finally, the plugins written for our assessment of this assignment will be used
in future iterations of the assignment to further support interface and
curriculum changes. The use of Hairball plugins in our assessment shows the
usefulness of static analysis tools in the development of fourth through sixth
grade curriculum. In the future, we hope to incorporate the use of these
plugins to provide real-time feedback and assessment to students and
instructors as students work on the assignment through the use of an automated
snapshot collection system.
